#Definition
Martinotti cells (MCs) have mostly ovoid-shaped somata, bitufted dendritic morphologies, and axons with characteristic spiny boutons projecting to layer I and spreading horizontally across neighbouring columns more than 1 mm. MCs are somatostatin (SOM) positive, and negative for parvalbumin (PV) as well as vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Calbindin (CB), calretinin (CR), neuropeptide Y (NPY) and cholecystokinin (CCK) are co-expressed with SOM in some MCs. All synapses are symmetrical and most synapses form onto dendritic shafts. MCs have been found to contact tuft, apical and basal dendrites in multiple neocortical layers: layer II/III MCs target mostly layer I and to a lesser degree layer II/III; layer IV MCs target mostly layer IV and to a lesser degree layer I; layer V and VI MCs target mostly layer IV and layer I and to a lesser degree the layer in which their somata was located. MCs typically display spike train accommodation in response to depolarizing somatic current injections, although some display non-accommodating and a few displayed irregular spiking responses and initial bursts. Accommodating responses were found in all layers, non-accommodating mostly in upper layers and bursting mostly in layer V. Some layer-specific trends seem to exist. Finally, MCs with accomodating firing have been observed to show the highest ion channels expression for (from highest to lowest); Caβ1, Kv3.3, HCN4, Caβ4, Kv3.2, Kv3.1, Kv2.1, HCN3, Caα1G, Kv3.4, Kv4.2, Kv1.1 and HCN2. [Wang et al., Cerebral Cortex, 2004](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1665344/)
